---
title: "Our workflow"
author: yberreby
category: setup
tags: [setup, git]
layout: post
published: true
date: 2020-06-22 12:15 +0200
---

This post is intended to lay out the fundamentals of our workflow, the reasoning
behind it, as well as to provide a refresher on git fundamentals.


## Organizing code

Each team should be able to quickly iterate on the features it handles without
interfering with the others' work. To that end, **at least at first, we'll all
work on separate ROMs**. Obviously, everyone _needs_ to be able to compile and run
their code on their machine.

We want our code to be modular, so we'll **split up logically distinct parts of
the code into multiple files** and include them with the `.INCLUDE` (or its alias,
`.INC`) directive. While prototyping, each team will then include the relevant
files into the appropriate test ROM.


## Using git effectively

When working on a group project, effective collaboration is vital ; CodiMD and
Discord are pretty straightforward to use, but git deserves special attention.

First off, for _the very basics_, [this cheat
sheet](https://github.github.com/training-kit/downloads/github-git-cheat-sheet.pdf)
should come in handy ; understanding and knowing its contents is an absolute
prerequisite.

Beyond that, core characteristics of our workflow are:
* `master` is sacred. Don't try to commit directly to it, nor to rewrite its
  history.
* When working on a feature, **always create a separate branch**.
* **Commit and push often** (but not to `master` ; you can't, anyway, because it is
  a protected branch).
* Use descriptive commit messages. We highly suggest to use the following template : `module: verb object`, such as `mapgen: improve performance`
* **Do not commit binary files** unless absolutely necessary (one notable
  exception: tiles).
* When the feature you've been working on is ready to be merged into master, [**create a Pull
  Request (PR)**](https://github.com/PainsPerdus/gboi-kirby/compare). This will
  provide an opportunity for the rest of the team to review and discuss your
  changes.
* **Use [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/PainsPerdus/gboi-kirby/issues)
  abundantly**. They are a great way to organize our work and are
  well-integrated with git. For example, if your work resolves a bug that was
  mentioned in, say, issue #24, you can write `fixes #24` in your commit
  message. The issue will be closed automatically (though not deleted!), and a
  reference to your commit will appear in it.



## Cheat sheet


### Creating a branch named `tile-colors` locally and checking it out
(i.e. switching to it):

```bash
git checkout -b tile-colors
```


### Staging changes and committing them
Local changes must typically be _staged_ before they can be committed. This is
done with `git add <path>`.

After doing so, and _before committing_, please review what you're about to
commit with `git status` (to see the affected files). If you want to inspect the
details of your staged changes, you can use `git diff --cached`. If you feel
you've made a mistake, [unstage as
needed](https://devconnected.com/how-to-unstage-files-on-git/).

Once you are satisfied with your staged changes, commit them with `git commit`,
which will open your text editor to let you write a commit message. Please write
a concise summary of your changes on the first line, add a blank line, then feel
free to go as much into details as you'd like in the rest of the commit.

Then, push your changes to your branch.


### Pushing your newly created branch to GitHub

The `-u` flag sets up a remote branch to track your local branch.
`origin` refers to a remote, namely our GitHub repository.

```bash
git push -u origin tile-colors # needed for the first push
git push # use this for subsequent pushes
```

### Merge commits and fast-forwarding

When merging (`git merge`, `git pull`, etc.), depending on your git history, a merge commit is not always created. 

When the git history is linear, you can fast-forward : no merge commit is created.

```
A - B - C    master         merge 
         \            --------------->  A - B - C - D  master
           D feature   (fast-forward)                  feature
```

When there's a fork, you cannot fast-forward : a merge commit is required.

```
A - B - C - D master        merge        A - B - C - D - F master
          \           ----------------->           \   / ^---- merge commit
            E feature (no fast-forward)              E     feature
```

By default, `git pull` allows merge commits. To avoid these types of commit, either pull with the flag `--ff-only` (will only merge if it can be fast-forwarded), or `--rebase` (will perform a rebase when needed, do not use if you don't know how to use it). You can use `git config pull.ff only` to automatically use `--ff-only` on this repository.

### Squashing

When merging, if you want to squash all your commits into one, use the flag `--squash`

For example:

```
A - B              master
      \                     
        C - D - E  feature
```

`git merge --squash feature`

```
A - B - C' master  (C' = C + D + E)
```

### Stashing

Sometimes, you do not want to commit your changes, but need to save your changes
somewhere (for instance when pulling). You could create a temporary commit, then
later rebase and squash, but an easier way is to use the stash.
`git stash` puts your unstaged changes into the stash,
`git stash pop` applies the latest stashed item and removes it from the stash,
`git stash drop` discards the latest stashed item without applying it (use with caution).
Additional commands can be found with `git help stash`.
